# Bitcoin  Penny Banks - Distributed Microtransactions

## Abstract

The architecture of the bitcoin blockchain does not support microtransactions without fees in order to reward the network for maintaining the ledger, small transactions are simply not economically valuable enough to maintain in a distributed blockchain.

This defines a simple technique to turn a larger bitcoin value into miniscule amounts that can be individually transferred between any two parties without requiring trust or timelocks while minimizing the potential for fees and "dust" transactions.  It shows how to create a side-ledger to use for exchanging the microtransactions based on the same proof-of-work mining value of bitcoin itself.

## Motivation

With the rules for accepted P2SH opcodes relaxing [in 0.10](https://github.com/bitcoin/bitcoin/pull/4365), new types of scripts can be used in transactions and will accepted into the blockchain by updated miners.  While many opcodes are still diabled to minimize the risk of a hard fork, only an `OP_HASH256` is required to enable micro-transactions.

The current [micropayment channels](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Contracts#Example_7:_Rapidly-adjusted_.28micro.29payments_to_a_pre-determined_party) technique works within the current limits and has had some early adoption, but it can now be significantly simplified and aligned with the core value structure of the blockchain, proof-of-work based hashing. The proposed [zero-knowledge contingent payment](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Zero_Knowledge_Contingent_Payment) is also very similar, but instead of an external protocol the contingency function is included as part of the transaction itself.

## Specification

First, a new `P2HH` script type is defined for use as the individual microtransactions, also knowns as `pennies` although they may have a variable number of satoshis assigned to them.  These P2HH scripts are only valid in a [P2SH](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Pay_to_script_hash) transaction.

### Pennies - Pay-to-Hash-Hash (P2HH)

```
scriptPubKey: OP_HASH256 <checkHash> OP_EQUALVERIFY OP_HASH256 <checkHash> OP_EQUALVERIFY
scriptSig: <data1> <data2>
```
This allows anyone with the correct `<data1>` and `<data2>` to spend it, you may recognize the pattern from the [transaction puzzle example](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Script#Transaction_puzzle).  These types of P2HH transactions can now be commonly used to anonymously exchange value based on any two secrets, as well as the foundation for a proof-of-work when the size of the `data` is fixed/known and can be generated by anyone willing to do the hashing work.

### Penny Banks (PB)

A `penny bank` is created by generating two or more P2HH transactions that equally divide an amount of bitcoin into smaller values that can be individually exchanged (the pennies).  The size of the `data` secrets for each one must be calculated such that the value it represents matches current block difficulty in number of hashes required to generate it through hashing. This set of microtransactions accurately represents a larger bitcoin value as a set of smaller proof of works equal to the bitcoin itself.

The PB transaction has all of the P2HH scripts as P2SH outputs and a P2PKH for each of the parties using the PB to carry forward the balance not associated with the included pennies.  Since a PB is typically very large and has many small outputs it would incur fees if broadcast as-is, like [micropayment channels](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Contracts#Example_7:_Rapidly-adjusted_.28micro.29payments_to_a_pre-determined_party) this transaction is kept private between the two parties and only used as a last resort if either party misbehaves.  The transaction can then be updated and "re-balanced" as pennies are exchanged, adjusting the outputs of the included P2PKHs and to reduce the resulting fees if either party abandons the transaction.

In order to guarantee a PB is funded, a P2SH is broadcast and validated with a 2-of-2 multisig so that both parties must agree upon and sign the current PB outputs in order to use the full transaction as-is as a backup.  At any point with either party wants to settle and close the PB, the remaining P2HH penny outputs are removed and just normal outputs remain.


#### Proof of Work Difficulty

The value of every bitcoin is backed by the current [difficulty](https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Difficulty), which reduces to a number of hashes-per-satoshi ([example formula](http://bitcoin.stackexchange.com/questions/12013/how-many-hashes-create-one-bitcoin/12030#12030).  Currently, the difficulty of [40007470271.271](https://bitcoinwisdom.com/bitcoin/difficulty) results in approximately [65 hashes](https://www.google.com/#q=((270%2C591%2C326+*+60+*+10)+%2F+25)+%2F+100%2C000%2C000) to back the value of one satoshi.  A proof of work for one satoshi would then require between 6 and 7 bits, where a random bitstring of that size when hashed would require an average of 65 hashes of the same size bitstring to find a match.

#### Private Penny Banks

> documentation here is a higher level work in progress

When Alice wants to perform microtransactions with Bob, they begin by creating a set of "half pennies" by calculating the current hashes-per-satoshi and generating an array of random bitstrings of the appropriate size for each penny's value.  Alice then hashes them and sends Bob the array of hashes.  Bob can then randomly select one or more of them and ask Alice to provide the secret data in order to validate the difficulty is set correctly (a partial/confidence-based [zero-knowledge proof](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zero-knowledge_proof) of the difficulty). Once Bob has validated the half-pennies, they perform the same process in reverse to create the full pennies and have Alice validate them.

At this point both Alice and Bob have an equal list of small proof-of-works that add up to a larger bitcoin value and can create the parent PB transaction.  Once both of them exchange their signatures of the agreed upon PB, then Alice creates a transaction to fund this PB and broadcasts it, so that the value is locked and can be verified by Bob before beginning any microtransactions.

As Alice and Bob exchange the actual small asset/values represented by a penny they also exchange the secret data for that penny and validate it. At regular intervals either side may request a re-balance, exchanging and signing an updated PB with the used pennies removed and the balance P2PKHs adjusted.  If either party abandons the PB, the most recently balanced PB will have the lowest penalty fees if recorded with the network.

Need to expand yet on these points:

* provides a way to prove the budget is available and each P2HH unlocks that amount of value
* the incentive is always to cooperate since transaction fees would be too high to claim the small values
* alice must be willing to lock value in the pennies but only after successful validation exchanges with bob
* neither party has any incentive to abandon the PB or try to mine the pennies, but either may do so as a last resort by incurring fees and mining power
* since the brute force of a proof-of-work P2HH requires as many hashes as mining, there is no incentive to crack them
* if either side abandons the PB transaction, it can be held onto as an asset that will likely increase in value
* the PB transactions can involve additional parties to add arbitration, lock to sidechains, include OP_RETURNs, etc
* the P2HH transactions can include additional hashes for more than two entities, be locked to certain public keys, etc

Summary steps:

* Alice->Bob offer half-pennies
* Bob->Alice verify half-pennies and create PB
* Bob->Alice send PB signed
* Alice->Bob signs PB and broadcasts funding of PB
* Bob verifies funding
* PB has the value locked, either can broadcast PB to claim the balance at that point (and incur larger fees)
* over time PB is re-balacnced, pennies removed and balances updated, new SIGs


#### Penny Bankers

> work in progress, brainstorming

Anyone can create a pair of Penny Banks with one or more well-known Penny Bankers and then use them as a method to send individual pennies and perform small microtransactions with any third party.  The Banker will manage the pair of PBs, one as a source of pennies, and another to receive pennies, and new ones can be created as needed.  The valid/current source PB must be shared with the third party who can validate that it is funded by the blockchain and signed by the Banker, and also validate its current status with the Banker before accepting pennies from it.

The recipient must also have a PB with either the same Banker or with a Banker that will clear pennies with the sender's. Each penny received can then be validated immediately locally as part of the PB, and should then be exchanged with their Banker into their private receiving PB.  Exchanging pennies offline is possible but runs the risk of them becoming invalid since the time delay between receiving and clearing is a window for the sender to double-spend them. 

A shared Banker is aware of both the source and destination PBs only while they are valid and exchanging pennies, using multiple Bankers who independently clear with each other helps minimize the visibility of those transactions.

